"How Cricket Balls Are Made"
(Extract from "The Wonder Book of How It's Done", 1952)

The cricket ball looks a very simple thing, just a sphere of leather with a few rows of stitching, but in reality it is far from simple. By the laws of the game, a match ball must be not less than 9 and not more than 9.25 inches in circumference, and not less than 5.5 nor more than 5.75 ounces in weight.  The problem confronting the maker is that of building up, within these limits, a ball which will stand the terrific thwack against the bat that scores a "boundary," and at the same time retain its shape.  There is yet another problem - that of centring the weight so that there shall be no "bias" in the ball, for, if a bowler is to get accurate spin, the weight of every part of the ball must be exactly equal to its opposite part.  To put this more simply: if a cricket ball is cut into any equal number of parts, each part must be of the same weight.

There are no less than 5 component parts in a match ball: first, the core, then the "quilting", as it is termed, then an inner covering of fine soft leather, and outside that the strong leather covering which has to take the strain of keeping the ball in shape.  The fifth, and not least important component, is the stitching, in which each stitch must be not only of equal size, but also of equal weight, both for the inner and outer rows of stitching.

Now, working outward from the centre, take first the core.  This, at the beginning, is a tiny sphere of cork, or a cube with layers on each side to build it into a sphere.  On to this tiny ball is wound fine, strong worsted, and this winding is a very delicate process, since the worsted has to be kept at a certain tension all the time in order to equalize the weight all round the tiny core.  Then comes another layer of cork, another winding of worsted, until a ball has been built up to fill the regulation covering.

First over this is fitted the inner covering, which is of very fine soft leather, and though soft, it is strong stuff, cleansed and scraped to a perfectly equal thickness - or thinness - in every part.  Four sections are cut, each one shaped to form a quarter of a sphere.  These fit neatly over the last layer of worsted, and inside the final covering of hard, strong leather, as a cushioning protection for the cork and worsted core.  In the case of a match ball, every bit of material used has been weighed and tested time after time during the process of building up the inner ball, to make certain that the finished article shall conform to match requirements.

There remains the fitting of the strong outer cover of hide, which, like the leather inner covering, is washed and scraped to perfect uniformity of weight and thickness before being cut, mostly into quarter spheres as in the case of the inner covering, and sometimes so as to form two halves, each of perfectly equal weight and shaped to take the ball.  Then comes the final stitching.

When the ball covering is in quarter sections, each pair of sections is stitched together on the inside, and examination of a well-made ball will reveal the perfect join of these two, a line running at right angles to the outer stitching.  Now the two halves are fitted over the ball with its soft leather covering, and the final, outer stitching is done.

Examination of a match ball will show that there are no less than 6 rows of this final stitching - that is, the stitcher goes round the ball 3 times, each time making two rows, one on each side of the joint.  Each stitch is perfect, taking an equal strain with the rest and being of precisely similar size.  And there is the finished ball, good for a few hundred "boundary" hits.

